---
layout: post
title: 2013, what a year!
description: "2013 retrospective"
modified: 2013-05-31
category: articles
tags: [2013, php, symfony2, servergrove]
---

I've been thinking for a long time to start a personal blog to share my thoughts about PHP, Symfony2 and all the random
stuff I like to read about. To open this blog I'd like to talk about how 2013 has been for me and what I expect from 2014.
Using SCRUM terminology, a *year retrospective*.

Definitely, 2013 has been one of the most intense years of my whole life:

## ServerGrove

Last January [I joined ServerGrove](http://blog.servergrove.com/2013/01/03/raul-fraile-joins-servergrove/), the *awesome*
PHP hosting company. I had been working the last year and a half as a Symfony2 trainer and freelance developer in some
interesting projects, but I was willing to be part of a team and help to build something cool with a longer-term vision.

I am really happy with the decision I made, I've met talented people and we even won the [2013 Symfony Awards for Best
B2B Website](http://blog.servergrove.com/2013/12/13/call-us-award-winning/). We've been working hard in the latest months
in the new version of the Control Panel, and it will be cooler and much much faster!

## MidwestPHP

In February I had the honor to visit US and be one of the speakers of [MidwestPHP](http://midwestphp.org/), which took
place in the beautiful *Minnesota*. It was my first time in the US and also the first time I was giving a talk in English,
but according to the [ratings](https://joind.in/talk/view/8225), people found my talk quite interesting! Symfony2 is
still not widely used in the US but there were lots of Drupal developers eager to learn about the Symfony2 components
that will be used in [Drupal 8](https://drupal.org/).

## Parenthood

May arrived with big news, my wife gave birth to our first son, *Eric*. 7 months later, we are really happy but I can't
say it has been easy. I must admit that I love sleeping, so the worst part for me it has been sleeping only 3 or 4 hours
during the first weeks. The most important is that Eric is healthy and is growing up normally.

## deSymfony

I have mixed feelings about [deSymfony 2013](http://desymfony.com/). For the first time, organizers decided to move from
Castellón - where the first three editions took place - to Madrid, and the response was overwhelming. Almost 400 people
attended and I was one of speakers, giving a talk about _refactoring_ in PHP and Symfony2 projects. To be honest, I think
it was the worst talk I've ever given and I was really disappointed with myself. I haven't even been able to watch the
video yet.

Keeping in mind that there were over 175 attendants with different programming skills, I tried to emphasize the importance
to refactor your code in a daily basis, more than talking about refactoring patterns. I think it helped to beginners, but
it was too simple for advanced programmers.

## LadybugPHP

I spent several months improving [LadybugPHP](https://github.com/raulfraile/ladybug), and finally released the 1.0 version
in September. I wanted to make *LadybugPHP* more extensible and fix some wrong decisions I made in the early versions.

Even though there is still so much work to do, I couldn't be happier with the end result:
[45,285 installs](https://packagist.org/packages/raulfraile/ladybug)! :)

## Master's degree

In July I decided to enroll for a [MsC in Computing Technologies](http://cvnet.cpd.ua.es/webcvnet/planestudio/planestudiond.aspx?plan=D031&Lengua=E#).
When you work in the web industry, most of the time there is no need to use *real* computer science skills, so I after
several years, I felt my CS skills were extremely rusty.

During these three months, I have refreshed tons of important CS concepts learnt in the degree that I had forgotten, as well
as learning new stuff - *always based on solid CS fundamentals*- about information theory, data compression, human language
technologies, biometry, cryptography and embedded systems.

## New year's resolutions

I consider myself an eternal learner, so obviously the new year's resolutions have to do with the new stuff I want to learn.
One of my biggest problems is that I like too many things, but having a job, a family and the MsC, it's almost impossible
to get extra time to learn, so one of my goals for 2014 is going to be to *focus* in 2 fields: 'web/frontend' and
'systems':

- 'web/frontend': In 2013 I felt in love with JavaScript thanks to AngularJS. So the main goal in this branch will be to learn
JavaScript *properly* and be productive, as well as it's ecosystem: [AngularJS](http://angularjs.org/), [Grunt](http://gruntjs.com/),
[NodeJS](http://nodejs.org/)...

- 'systems': As a PHP programmer, I'd like to go down one step. That involves improving my Linux skills, C code - PHP
extensions/source code -, memory management, filesystems... Long story short: try to master the *foundations* where PHP
lives on.

See you in the next post!